![Turquoise Einstein, a quaternion and
Doug](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/turq_einstein_txyz_doug.jpg) ![Doing
Physics with Quaternions](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/banner.jpg)

[ ![](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/interference_ty_red_blue.gif)
](http://visualphysics.org/)

[analytical animations at Visual Physics.org](http://visualphysics.org/)

[ ![GEM t-shirt](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/front_eqs_v3_400.png)

Buy a Unified Standard Model t-shirt! $18 total

](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/tshirt/tshirt.html)

## [Video Ed](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/video/video.html)

Technical shows, Not-so-technical, quaternion animations, all served up from
YouTube. Watch and learn!

## [Visual Physics.org](http://visualphysics.org/)

A community research web site centered on visualing quaternions, often
motivated by physics.

## Math ([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/math.pdf))

[ An overview](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/intro/overview/
overview.html)

[ A brief history of quaternions](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaterni
ons/intro/history/history.html)

[ Multiplying quaternions the easy way](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/qu
aternions/intro/multiplying/multiplying.html)

[ Inner and outer products](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/in
tro/products/products.html)

[ Scalars, vectors, tensors and all that](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/
quaternions/intro/scalarsvectors/scalarsvectors.html)

[Quaternion analysis](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/intro/an
alysis/analysis.html)
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/analysis.pdf),
related video: ["Why Quantum Mechanics is
Weird"](http://www.archive.org/download/WhyisQMWeird/WhyisQMWeird.mp4))

[ Topology](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/intro/topology/top
ology.html)

[ Where quaternions fit in math](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternio
ns/intro/math_structure.pdf), adapted from Max Tegmark, 1998.

[ Tools for algebra, trig, logs...](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quater
nions/intro/tools/tools.html)

[ Java Quaternion
calculator](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/java/qcalc/qcalc.html)

\- written in Java 1.0, so is broken :-(

[Dynamic graphs](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/qemation/Dyna
mic_graphs/index.html)

  

## Physics

![Force equals mass times
acceleration](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/fma.jpg)

### Classical Physics
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/classical.pdf))

[ F = m a, in an inertial frame, in polar coordinates, and in a rotating
reference frame](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/classical/2nd
Law/2ndLaw.html)

[ The simple harmonic oscillator and wave equation](http://www.theworld.com/%7
Esweetser/quaternions/classical/sho/sho.html)

[ 4 tests for a conservative force](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quater
nions/classical/tests/tests.html)

![F equals minus G M m over R
squared](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/fgmmr2.jpg)

### Unifying Gravity and EM

#### I am rescinding my efforts to unify gravity and EM using quaternions and
hypercomplex numbers. The quaternions do the work of EM fine and that part of
this work is still of value. The hypercomplex numbers were given the chore of
doing gravity. Under a rotation, the square of a hypercomplex number changes.
As such, when used in a Lagrangian, angular momentum will not be conserved.
Gravity most definitely conserves angular momentum. There may be things people
can learn (how to derive field equations using Lagrange densities, the
precession of the perihelion of Mercury, ...).

#### Simply put, all of the work, claims, and even the t-shirt, that touch on
hypercomplex numbers are WRONG. I learned a huge amount of real physics
anyway. You might also. Good luck in your studies of this flawed work.

I think it is reasonable to believe I have found a way to unify gravity with
the forces of electromagnetism, the weak and strong forces in a way that can
been quantized. Only unloved math tools are used. The problem is a _puzzle_ to
be solved, not a math problem so difficult only a few folks at the Institute
for Advanced Study to understand. At the core is the action, shown here, which
requires both quaternions and hypercomplex multiplication (indicated by the
box-times), keeping only the scalar. My paper is here ( [Mathematica
notebook](http://bit.ly/GEMnb), [html](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quater
nions/gravity/em-g-gem/em-g-gem.html), or
[pdf](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/em-g-gem.pdf))

![GEM action](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/EM-G-GEM_actions.png)

#### Brief summaries or calculations

[ The Unified GEM Action and Symmetries](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quate
rnions/gravity/GEM_action/GEM_action.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/GEM_action.pdf))

[ The Unified GEM Lagrangian, Field Equations, and Solutions](http://theworld.
com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/GEM_summary/GEM_summary.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/GEM_summary.pdf))

[ The Precession of the Perihelion of Mercury Based on the Unifed GEM Proposal
](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/precession/precession.ht
ml) ([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/precession.pdf))

[ Derivation of the GEM unified field proposal using quaternions exclusively](
http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/GEM_derivation/GEM_derivat
ion.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/GEM_derivation.pdf))

#### Slides from talks

Geometry + 4-Potentials = Unified Filed Theory, 2007 April APS talk available
as [html](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/geo_plus_4-potenti
als/geo_plus_4-potentials.html) or [YouTube
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p7HyXBuY2dM).

[ Unifying Gravity and EM, a Riddle You Can
Solve](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/riddle/riddle.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/riddle.pdf)), 9th
Eastern Gravity Meeting, 2006.

[ Why a Rank 1 Unified Field Theory is Compelling and Its Background
Mathematical
Structure](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/rank1/rank1.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/egm8.pdf)), 8th Eastern
Gravity Meeting, 2005.

[ Unifying Gravity and EM by Generalizing
EM](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/General_em/index.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/general_em.pdf)), 7th
Eastern Gravity Meeting, 2004.

Unifying gravity and EM by analogies with EM, MIT IAP course, Jan. 2003.

  1. [ Lagrange Densities](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/IAP_1/IAP_1.html) ([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/day1.pdf), [video 1](http://www.archive.org/download/lecture_1/lecture_1.mp4), [video 2](http://www.archive.org/download/lecture_2/lecture_2.mp4))
  2. [ Fields and Quantum Mechanics](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/IAP_2/IAP_2.html) ([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/day2.pdf), [video 3](http://www.archive.org/download/TheStandUpPhysicistLecture3of6/IAP_Lecture_3.mp4), [video 4](http://www.archive.org/download/TheStandUpPhysicistLecture4of6/IAP_Lecture_4.mp4))
  3. [ Forces, Metrics, and New Physics](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/IAP_3/IAP_3.html) ([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/day3.pdf), [video 5](http://www.archive.org/download/TheStandUpPhysicistIAPLecture5of6/IAP_Lecture_5.mp4), [video 6](http://www.archive.org/download/TheStandUpPhysicistIAPLecture6of6/IAP_Lecture_6.mp4))

[Realizing Einstein's Dreams: Unifying Gravity and Light, and Why Quantum
Mechanics is Weird](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/Einstein
_dreams/Einstein_dreams.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/e_dreams.pdf)), Joint
APS/AAPT meeting, Spring 2005.

[ 4-potential Equations for Gravity and Electromagnetism](http://theworld.com/
%7Esweetser/quaternions/talks/4-potential/4-potential.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/4-potentials.pdf)),
Joint APS/AAPT meeting, Fall, 2003.

[ The Cosmological Consequences of the Product Rule](http://theworld.com/%7Esw
eetser/quaternions/talks/product_rule/product_rule.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/chain_rule.pdf)), Joint
APS/AAPT meeting, Spring, 2004. A Universe with zero dark matter is good :-)

[ Picture Stories of Events in Spactime](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quate
rnions/talks/picture_stories/picture_stories.html)
([pdf](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/picture_stories.pdf)),
Do While Studios, Spring 2000. The relationship between Special and General
relativity using quaternions.

#### Papers

![metric or
potential](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/metric_or_potential.jpg)

**[A family of variations on the Maxwell action using quaternions and hypercomplex numbers contains the symmetries of the standard model and a testable gravity theory**](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/em-g-gem/em-g-gem.html) ([pdf](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/em-g-gem.pdf))  
(my current best effort, version 20091119)

OLDER EFFORTS... an approaching using standard tensors and differential
geometry

[Deducing a Unified Field Theory from Electromagnetism](http://theworld.com/%7
Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/em2gem/em2gem.html)
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/em2gem.pdf)).

[ Unifying Gravity and EM by analogies to EM](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/
quaternions/gravity/analog.v4.iop/analog.v4.iop.html)
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/analog.v4.iop.pdf))
(v 4.4, 13 pages).

[Geometry + 4-Potential = Unified Field
Theory](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/essay/essay.html),
submission for the 2007 Essays on Gravitation, sponsored by the Gravity
Research foundation
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/essay.pdf))

An approach using quaternions.

[ Einstein's Vision I: Classical unification of gravity and electromagnetism
using Riemannian quaternions](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/
gravity/unified_field/unified_field.html)
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/unified_field.pdf))

[ Einstein's Vision II: Unified force with constant velocity profiles](http://
www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/unified_force/unified_force.h
tml)
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/unified_force.pdf)).

[ Ropes and Gravity](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/gravity/s
trings/strings.html)

#### Posters

Unifying Gravity and EM by analogies to EM
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/poster.pdf))
Brookhaven National Lab meeting.

#### Mathematica notebooks

From the Lagrange density to experimental tests ([pdf](http://www.theworld.com
/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/Lagrangian_to_tests.nb.pdf), or [.nb](http://www.t
heworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/notebooks/Lagrangian_to_tests.nb))

#### Videos!

[![TheStandUpPhysicist.com](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/the_stand_up_sid
eways.gif)](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/tsup/tsup.html)

will have all my latest video-education efforts. Enjoy.

\--boxed ![The curl of the B field is
zero](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/curl_B.jpg)

### Electromagnetism
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/em.pdf))

[ Classical electrodynamics](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/E
andM/classicalem/classicalem.html)

[ Electromagnetic field gauges](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternion
s/EandM/gauges/gauges.html)

[ The Maxwell equations in the light gauge:
QED?](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/EandM/qed/qed.html)

[ The Lorentz force](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/EandM/Lor
entzForce/LorentzForce.html)

[ The stress-energy-momentum 2-tensor of the electromagnetic field](http://www
.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/EandM/tensor/tensor.html)

Paper: Maxwell's vision: electromagnetism with Hamilton's quaternions ([pdf](h
ttp://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/em_w_quaternions.pdf)),
Second Meeting on Quaternionic Structures in Mathematics and Physics, Rome,
1999.

![energy equals gamma m c
squared](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/egmc2.jpg)

### Special Relativity
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/sr.pdf))

[ Doing the work of the Lorentz group with rotations and dilations](http://www
.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/relativity/rotationdilation/rotationdila
tion.html)

[ An alternative algebra for boosts](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quate
rnions/relativity/altalgebra/altalgebra.html)

#### Problem set solutions from MIT's 8.033, Classical and Relativistic
Mechanics

[ Index and links to solved problems](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quat
ernions/relativity/index.html)

[ PS 1: Kinematic effects of relativity](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/q
uaternions/relativity/ps1/ps1.html)

[ PS 2: More kinematic effects](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternion
s/relativity/ps2/ps2.html)

[ PS 3: The Lorentz transformation and the addition of velocities](http://www.
theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/relativity/ps3/ps3.html)

[ PS 4: The Doppler effect, 4-vector invariants, and the twin paradox](http://
www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/relativity/ps4/ps4.html)

[ PS 5: Energy, Mass and Momentum](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quatern
ions/relativity/ps5/ps5.html)

[ PS 6: The Compton effect and threshold collision problems](http://www.thewor
ld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/relativity/ps6/ps6.html)

![The norm of the wave function
phi](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/phi2.jpg)

### Quantum Mechanics
([pdf](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/qm.pdf))

[ Bracket notation and quaternions: quaternions as a complete inner product sp
ace](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/quantum/bracket/bracket.h
tml).

[ Multiplying polar representations](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quate
rnions/quantum/polar/polar.html).

[ Commutators and the uncertainty principle](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweets
er/quaternions/quantum/uncertainty/uncertainty.html).

[ Unifying the representations of spin and angular momentum](http://www.thewor
ld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/quantum/spin/spin.html).

[ The Schrodinger equation](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/qu
antum/schrodinger/schrodinger.html).

[ The Klein-Gordon equation](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/q
uantum/KleinGordon/KleinGordon.html).

[ Visualizing the Standard Model](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaterni
ons/quantum/standard_model/standard_model.html).

[ Time reversal](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/quantum/timeR
eversal/timeReversal.html).

## Let's Talk

![](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/dougsketch.jpg)

  * Follow on twitter, the account is "visualphysics"
  * Subscribe for new videos on YouTuve, the account is "sweetser"
  * [ Quaternion Question and Answer](http://greenspun.com/bboard/q-and-a.tcl?topic=quaternions), a site for chatting about quaternions.
  * [Feedback welcome!](mailto:sweetser@alum.mit.edu)

## Get Stuff

For a fee: [Books](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/buttons/order.html),
[Buttons](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/buttons/info.html), [Turquoise
Einstien T-shirts](http://www.cafepress.com/quaternions), and [No Stinking
Higgs
t-shirts](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/tshirt/tshirt.html)

For free: [Doing Physics with
Quaternions](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/book.pdf)
(much of this site, 156 pages), [Lectures on Dynamic Graphs and Unified Field
Theory](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/lectures.pdf) (75
pages).

[ ![Books](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/book.jpg)](http://world.std.com/%
7Esweetser/buttons/order.html) [ ![Buttons](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/
button.jpg)](http://world.std.com/%7Esweetser/buttons/info.html) [ ![Turquoise
Einstein t-shirts](DoingPhysicswithQuaternions_files/tshirt.jpg)](http://www.c
afeshops.com/cp/store.aspx?s=quaternions) [ ![No Stinkin' Higgs t-shirts](Doin
gPhysicswithQuaternions_files/front_eqs_210.png)](http://world.std.com/%7Eswee
tser/quaternions/tshirt/tshirt.html)

A few good papers:

  1. Sudbery's [ first paper](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/Quaternionic-analysis-memo.pdf) (memo, 1977, 44 pages) on why quaternion analysis is no good.
  2. Sudbery's [ second paper](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/Quaternionic-analysis.pdf) (1979, 28 pages) on the topic. Please look to my work above on quaternion analysis for a much better alternative!.
  3. C. A. Deavours paper, ["The Quaternion Calculus"](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/deavours.pdf). My critique is that using his definition of a quaternion derivative, if a function like f=q is analytic in q, f^2 is not. That indicates a better definition must be found before quaternion analysis can really begin. 
  4. Salamin's [paper](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/stanfordaiwp79-salamin.pdf) (1979, 9 pages) on rotations.
  5. Howell and Lafon's [paper](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/cornellcstr75-245.pdf) (1975, 13 pages) on the efficiency of quaternion multiplication.
  6. Silberstein's [paper](http://www.theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/ps/Silberstein-Relativity.pdf) (1912, 20 pages) on using biquaternions for quaternion special relativity. Biquaternions are NOT an algebraic field, and are not used in any operations on this web site.
  7. Resources on gimble lock, a problem that arises from _not_ using quaternions for 3D rotations, links provided by Alex Green: [Apollo](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/alsj/e-1344.htm), [A fourth gimbol for Christmas](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/alsj/gimbals.html), [skylab](http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19790072987_1979072987.pdf), [Gimble Lock - Explained](http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=rrUCBOlJdt4). Bottom line: always avoid Euler angles.

## Donations

All work done/financed in my free time. Woof!

* * *

  

[Home Page](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/index.html) | [ Quaternion
Physics](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/qindex/qindex.html) | [
Old index
page](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/quaternions/qindex/qindex.old.html) | [
Pop
Science](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/PopScience/PopIndex/PopIndex.html)

[Java](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/java/javaindex.html) | [The
Bike](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/bike/bike.html) | [Lindy
Hop](http://theworld.com/%7Esweetser/LindyHop/LindyHop.html) | [Contact
Doug](mailto:sweetser@alum.mit.edu)

Copyright 1997, doug &lt;sweetser@alum.mit.edu&gt; All rights reserved
worldwide.

